\begin{abstractpage}
\begin{abstract}[Resumen][spanish]
\inlinetodo{Translate from Abstract}
\end{abstract}

\begin{abstract}[Abstract][english]
Tensors are, an extension of arrays, widely used in a variety of
programming tasks. Tensors are the building block of many modern machine
learning frameworks and are fundamental in the definition of deep
learning models. Linters are indispensable tools for today's developers,
as they help the developers to check code before executing it. Despite
the popularity of tensors, linters for Python that check and flag code
with tensors are nonexistent. Given the tremendous amount of work done
in Python with (and without) tensors, it is quite baffling that little
work has been done in this regard. Abstract Interpretation is a
methodology/framework for statically analysing code. The idea of
Abstract Interpretation is to soundly overapproximate the result of
running a piece of code over all possible inputs of the program. A sound
overapproximation ensures that the Abstract Interpreter will never omit
a true negative, i.e.~if a piece of code is not flagged by the Abstract
Interpreter, then it can be safely assumed that the code will not fail.
The Abstract Interpreter can be modified so that it only outputs true
positives, although losing soundness, i.e.~the interpreter can flag
which parts of the code are going to fail no matter how the code is run.

In this work, we formalise a subset of Python with emphasis on tensor
operations. Our formal Python semantics are based on The Python Language
Reference. An Abstract Interpreter was defined and implemented from the
Python formalisation. We show how each part of the Abstract Interpreter
was built: the Abstract Domains defined, and the inferred formal
semantics. We present the structure of Pytropos, the Abstract
Interpreter implemeted. Pytropos is able to check NumPy array operations
taking into account broadcasting and complex NumPy functions as
\texttt{array} and \texttt{dot}. We constructed 80 unit test cases
checking the capabilities of Pytropos and 50 property test cases
checking compliance with the official Python implementation. We show
what and how many bugs the Abstract Interpreter was able to find.
\end{abstract}
\end{abstractpage}
